---
title:  "Art Investments"
mathjax: true
layout: post
categories: finance
---

Falling interest rates and saturation in traditional financial markets has lead to an influx of capital into alternative investment vehicles like art. In the following, we will take a closer look at the art market and its inner workings. While there is a flood of artists from universities only few will ever gain the recognition of popular artists like Warhol or Picasso. What makes these artists unique and desirable are concepts and ideas that were revolutionary at the time. More recent artists that meet this criterion would be Banksy and Richter. These artists have become icons of art history and so have their works of art. Therefore, buying these art pieces needs to be treated differently from buying prints through IKEA. The prestigious art market is highly illiquid and prices are driven through shortages (sometimes artificial). Buying through galleries will sometimes involve buying multiple paintings from newer artists to gain access to a specific art work. Despite the opening of many markets through online auction houses a lot of deals are either private or entered through art exhibits. The most renown auction houses are Sotheby's and Christie's. Both have increased their online offering during the recent pandemic. The most notable art exhibits are Art Basel and TEFAF Maastricht. Usually most art sales are conducted at VIP days right before the art exhibition is opened to the public. Visitor passes during these days are highly restricted and usually given out to high net-worth individuals via investment banks or similar contacts. For instance, Deutsche Bank is the main sponsor of the Frieze Art Fair at 50 Mio. Euros per year.


Professional art investments usually start at 100k Euros. Despite the fact, it is possible to invest into smaller artists or more common pieces of art. Investments in newer artists can be struck at smaller local auctions. Note that these investments might seem lower risk in terms of capital expenditure, but are in fact highly speculative. Especially, investments in the early days of an artist are comparable to gambling without an edge. Important factors that could be considered are network, social impact and recognition of the respective artist. Alternatively, it is possible to hunt art through antique dealers or private sales that have not yet sorted an estate. These deals often offer a discount compared to auction houses that often have fees of up to 30%. Antiquités Brocantes could be an interesting address in Paris. Furthermore, private sales do not have VAT attached to it in Germany. Gallerists that find specific art works usually take a commission of up to 10% and avoid the need to go art hunting yourself. 
Similar to the stock market the art market has specific Blue Chip artists that have yielded fairly good returns. For instance, Richter has yielded an average of 14.6% (inflation adjusted) returns over the past 30 years. Note that this does not include insurance and storage costs. Art similar to Old Timers requires a lot of maintenance. In terms of storage, insurance costs can be reduced by using art storages. Freeports even remove the need for customs. Art works only need to pass X-Ray examination. Singapore has a special exemption for museums that lets you exhibit art pieces without paying any customs. Otherwise, art works need to remain inside the Freeport avoid customs. Despite the fact, many storage facilities offer specialised art services nowadays including curators and photographers. Germany has an interesting law that lets you bypass inheritance tax by loaning your art works to a museum for 10 years. During this time it is possible to loan against these art works. While the Law in Germany is still unclear in this regard, the US and Great Britain have created the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) that avoids double loans. Another option for investing into art are art funds. British Rail Pension fund as yielded reasonable returns in the past few years. Other investment funds usually have minimum buy-in  amounts and require certain holding periods. Interest payments are usually between 6 and 10%. 

Nothing worse than a fake. Small fortunes can disappear in a short amount of time if a fake is discovered. One of the most popular counterfeiter is Wolfgang Beltracchi who created fake originals of various artists. Currently, it is estimated that up to 30% of the entire art market could be fakes. Often the only way to find falsifications are pigment analysis. These typically cost 10k Euros. A typical example for spotting a copy would be the use titanic white in a Picasso painting from the blue period. 

One of the largest emerging art markets right now are the United Arab Emirates (UAE). The last purchasable Leonard da Vinci painting was purchased in 2017 by the Saudi crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman for 400 Mio. Euros. 


## References

1. Wie Sie mit Picasso & Co. ein Vermögen aufbauen [Dr. Neumann]